that she would not go back to live there for a king’s ransom,
not if you were to offer her millions—a pure hypothesis—and that
everything (everything, that is to say, to do with the kitchen and
“usual offices”) was much better fitted up in the new house. Which, it
is high time now that the reader should be told—and told also that we
had moved into it because my grandmother, not having been at all well
(though we took care to keep this reason from her), was in need of
better air—was a flat forming part of the Hôtel de Guermantes.

At the age when a Name, offering us an image of the unknowable which we
have poured into its mould, while at the same moment it connotes for us
also an existing place, forces us accordingly to identify one with the
other to such a point that we set out to seek in a city for a soul which
it cannot embody but which we have no longer the power to expel from the
sound of its name, it is not only to towns and rivers that names give an
individuality, as do allegorical paintings, it is not only the physical
universe which they pattern with differences, people with marvels, there
is the social universe also; and so every historic house, in town or
country, has its lady or its fairy, as every forest has its spirit, as
there is a nymph for every stream. Sometimes, hidden in the heart of its
name, the fairy is transformed to suit the life of our imagination by
which she lives; thus it was that the atmosphere in which Mme. de
Guermantes existed in me, after having been for years no more than the
shadow cast by a magic lantern slide or the light falling through a
painted window, began to let its colours fade when quite other dreams
impregnated it with the bubbling coolness of her flowing streams.

And yet the fairy must perish if we come in contact with the real person
to whom her name corresponds, for that person the name then begins to
reflect, and she has in her nothing of the fairy; the fairy may revive
if we remove ourself from the person, but if we remain in her presence
the fairy definitely dies and with her the name, as happened to the
family of Lusignan, which was fated to become extinct on the day when
the fairy Mélusine should disappear. Then the Name, beneath our
successive “restorations” of which we may end by finding, as their
original, the beautiful portrait of a strange lady whom we are never to
meet, is nothing more than the mere photograph, for identification, to
which we refer in order to decide whether we know, whether or not we
ought to bow to a person who passes us in the street. But let a
sensation from a bygone year—like those recording instruments which
preserve the sound and the manner of the various artists who have sung
or played into them—enable our memory to make us hear that name with the
particular ring with which it then sounded in our ears, then, while the
name itself has apparently not changed, we feel the distance that
separates the dreams which at different times its same syllables have
meant to us. For a moment, from the clear echo of its warbling in some
distant spring, we can extract, as from the little tubes which we use in
painting, the exact, forgotten, mysterious, fresh tint of the days which
we had believed ourself to be recalling, when, like a bad painter, we
were giving to the whole of our past, spread out on the same canvas, the
tones, conventional and all alike, of our unprompted memory. Whereas on
the contrary, each of the moments that composed it employed, for an
original creation, in a matchless harmony, the colour of those days
which we no longer know, and which, for that matter, will still suddenly
enrapture me if by any chance the name “Guermantes”, resuming for a
moment, after all these years, the sound, so different from its sound
to-day, which it had for me on the day of Mlle. Percepied’s marriage,
brings back to me that mauve—so delicate, almost too bright, too
new—with which the billowy scarf of the young Duchess glowed, and, like
two periwinkle flowers, growing beyond reach and blossoming now again,
her two eyes, sunlit with an azure smile. And the name Guermantes of
those days is also like one of those little balloons which have been
filled with oxygen, or some such gas; when I come to explode it, to make
it emit what it contains, I breathe the air of the Combray of that year,
of that day, mingled with a fragrance of hawthorn blossom blown by the
wind from the corner of the square, harbinger of rain, which now sent
the sun packing, now let him spread himself over the red woollen carpet
to the sacristy, steeping it in a bright geranium scarlet, with that, so
to speak, Wagnerian harmony in its gaiety which makes the wedding
service always impressive. But even apart from rare moments such as
these, in which suddenly we feel the original entity quiver and resume
its form, carve itself out of the syllables now soundless, dead; if, in
the giddy rush of daily life, in which they serve only the most
practical purposes, names have lost all their colour, like a prismatic
top that spins too quickly and seems only grey, when, on the other hand,
in our musings we reflect, we seek, so as to return to the past, to
slacken, to suspend the perpetual motion by which we are borne along,
gradually we see once more appear, side by side, but entirely distinct
from one another, the tints which in the course of our existence have
been successively presented to us by a single name.

What form was assumed in my mind by this name Guermantes when my first
nurse—knowing no more, probably, than I know to-day in whose honour it
had been composed—sang me to sleep with that old ditty, _Gloire à la
Marquise de Guermantes_, or when, some years later, the veteran Maréchal
de Guermantes, making my nursery-maid’s bosom swell with pride, stopped
in the Champs-Elysées to remark: “A fine child, that!” and gave me a
chocolate drop from his comfit-box, I cannot, of course, now say. Those
years of my earliest childhood are no longer a part of myself; they are
external to me; I can learn nothing of them save—as we learn things that
happened before we were born—from the accounts given me by other people.
But more recently I find in the period of that name’s occupation of me
seven or eight different shapes which it has successively assumed; the
earliest were the most beautiful; gradually my musings, forced by
reality to abandon a position that was no longer tenable, established
themselves anew in one slightly less advanced until they were obliged to
retire still farther. And, with Mme. de Guermantes, was transformed
simultaneously her dwelling, itself also the offspring of that name,
fertilised from year to year by some word or other that came to my ears
and modulated the tone of my musings; that dwelling of hers reflected
them in its very stones, which had turned to mirrors, like the surface
of a cloud or of a lake. A dungeon keep without mass, no more indeed
than a band of orange light from the summit of which the lord and his
lady dealt out life and death to their vassals, had given place—right at
the end of that “Guermantes way” along which, on so many summer
afternoons, I retraced with my parents the course of the Vivonne—to that
land of bubbling streams where the Duchess taught me to fish for trout
and to know the names of the flowers whose red and purple clusters
adorned the walls of the neighbouring gardens; then it had been the
ancient heritage, famous in song and story, from which the proud, race
of Guermantes, like a carved and mellow tower that traverses the ages,
had risen already over France when the sky was still empty at those
points where, later, were to rise Notre Dame of Paris and Notre Dame of
Chartres, when on the summit of the hill of Laon the nave of its
cathedral had not yet been poised, like the Ark of the Deluge on the
summit of Mount Ararat, crowded with Patriarchs and Judges anxiously
leaning from its windows to see whether the wrath of God were yet
appeased, carrying with it the types of the vegetation that was to
multiply on the earth, brimming over with animals which have escaped
even by the towers, where oxen grazing calmly upon the roof look down
over the plains of Champagne; when the traveller who left Beauvais at
the close of day did not yet see, following him and turning with his
road, outspread against the gilded screen of the western sky, the black,
ribbed wings of the cathedral. It was, this “Guermantes”, like the scene
of a novel, an imaginary landscape which I could with difficulty picture
to myself and longed all the more to discover, set in the midst of real
lands and roads which all of a sudden would become alive with heraldic
details, within a few miles of a railway station; I recalled the names
of the places round it as if they had been situated at the foot of
Parnassus or of Helicon, and they seemed precious to me, as the physical
conditions—in the realm of topographical science—required for the
production of an unaccountable phenomenon. I saw again the escutcheons
blazoned beneath the windows of Combray church; their quarters filled,
century after century, with all the lordships which, by marriage or
conquest, this illustrious house had brought flying to it from all the
corners of Germany, Italy and France; vast territories in the North,
strong cities in the South, assembled there to group themselves in
Guermantes, and, losing their material quality, to inscribe
allegorically their dungeon vert, or castle triple-towered argent upon
its azure field. I had heard of the famous tapestries of Guermantes, I
could see them, mediaeval and blue, a trifle coarse, detach themselves
like a floating cloud from the legendary, amaranthine name at the foot
of the ancient forest in which Childebert went so often hunting; and
this delicate, mysterious background of their lands, this vista of the
ages, it seemed to me that, as effectively as by journeying to see them,
I might penetrate all their secrets simply by coming in contact for a
moment in Paris with Mme. de Guermantes, the princess paramount of the
place and lady of the lake, as if her face, her speech must possess the
local charm of forest groves and streams, and the same secular
peculiarities as the old customs recorded in her archives. But then I
had met Saint-Loup; he had told me that the castle had borne the name of
Guermantes only since the seventeenth century, when that family had
acquired it. They had lived, until then, in the neighbourhood, but their
title was not taken from those parts. The village of Guermantes had
received its name from the castle round which it had been built, and so
that it should not destroy the view from the castle, a servitude, still
in force, traced the line of its streets and limited the height of its
houses. As for the tapestries, they were by Boucher, bought in the
nineteenth century by a Guermantes with a taste for the arts, and hung,
interspersed with a number of sporting pictures of no merit which he
himself had painted, in a hideous drawing-room upholstered in
“adrianople” and plush. By these revelations Saint-Loup had introduced
into the castle elements foreign to the name of Guermantes which made it
impossible for me to continue to extract solely from the resonance of
the syllables the stone and mortar of its walls. And so, in the heart of
the name, was effaced the castle mirrored in its lake, and what now
became apparent to me, surrounding Mme. de Guermantes as her dwelling,
had been her house in Paris, the Hôtel de Guermantes, limpid like its
name, for no material and opaque element intervened to interrupt and
blind its transparence. As the word church signifies not only the temple
but the assembly of the faithful also, this Hôtel de Guermantes
comprised all those who shared the life of the Duchess, but these
intimates on whom I had never set eyes were for me only famous and
poetic names, and knowing exclusively persons who themselves also were
names only, did but enhance and protect the mystery of the Duchess by
extending all round her a vast halo which at the most declined in
brilliance as its circumference increased.

In the parties which she gave, since I could not imagine the guests as
having any bodies, any moustaches, any boots, as making any utterances
that were commonplace, or even original in a human and rational way,
this whirlpool of names, introducing less material substance than would
a phantom banquet or a spectral ball, round that statuette in Dresden
china which was Madame de Guermantes, kept for her palace of glass the
transparence of a showcase. Then, after Saint-Loup had told me various
anecdotes about his cousin’s chaplain, her gardener, and the rest, the
Hôtel de Guermantes had become—as the Louvre might have been in days
gone by—a kind of castle, surrounded, in the very heart of Paris, by its
own domains, acquired by inheritance, by virtue of an ancient right that
had quaintly survived, over which she still enjoyed feudal privileges.
But this last dwelling itself vanished when we had come to live beside
Mme. de Villeparisis in one of the flats adjoining that occupied by Mme.
de Guermantes in a wing of the Hôtel. It was one of those old town
houses, a few of which are perhaps still to be found, in which the court
of honour—whether they were alluvial deposits washed there by the rising
tide of democracy, or a legacy from a more primitive time when the
different trades were clustered round the overlord—is flanked by little
shops and workrooms, a shoemaker’s, for instance, or a tailor’s, such as
we see nestling between the buttresses of those cathedrals which the
aesthetic zeal of the restorer has not swept clear of such accretions; a
porter who also does cobbling, keeps hens, grows flowers, and, at the
far end, in the main building, a “Comtesse” who, when she drives out in
her old carriage and pair, flaunting on her hat a few nasturtiums which
seem to have escaped from the plot by the porter’s lodge (with, by the
coachman’s side on the box, a footman who gets down to leave cards at
every aristocratic mansion in the neighbourhood), scatters vague little
smiles and waves her hand in greeting to the porter’s children and to
such of her respectable fellow-tenants as may happen to be passing, who,
to her contemptuous affability and levelling pride, seem all the same.

In the house in which we had now come to live, the great lady at the end
of the courtyard was a Duchess, smart and still quite young. She was, in
fact, Mme. de Guermantes and, thanks to Françoise, I soon came to know
all about her household. For the Guermantes (to whom Françoise regularly
alluded as the people “below”, or “downstairs”) were her constant
preoccupation from the first thing in the morning when, as she did
Mamma’s hair, casting a forbidden, irresistible, furtive glance down
into the courtyard, she would say: “Look at that, now; a pair of holy
Sisters; that’ll be for downstairs, surely;” or, “Oh! just look at the
fine pheasants in the kitchen window; no need to ask where they came
from, the Duke will have been out with his gun!”—until the last thing at
night when, if her ear, while she was putting out my night-things,
caught a few notes of a song, she would conclude: “They’re having
company down below; gay doings, I’ll be bound;” whereupon, in her
symmetrical face, beneath the arch of her now snow-white hair, a smile
from her young days, sprightly but proper, would for a moment set each
of her features in its place, arranging them in an intricate and special
order, as though for a country-dance.

But the moment in the life of the Guermantes which excited the keenest
interest in Françoise, gave her the most complete satisfaction and at
the same time the sharpest annoyance was that at which, the two halves
of the great gate having been thrust apart, the Duchess stepped into her
carriage. It was generally a little while after our servants had
finished the celebration of that sort of solemn passover which none
might disturb, called their midday dinner, during which they were so far
taboo that my father himself was not allowed to ring for them, knowing
moreover that none of them would have paid any more attention to the
fifth peal than to the first, and that the discourtesy would therefore
have been a pure waste of time and trouble, though not without trouble
in store for himself. For Françoise (who, in her old age, lost no
opportunity of standing upon her dignity) would without fail have
presented him, for the rest of the day, with a face covered with the
tiny red cuneiform hieroglyphs by which she made visible—though by no
means legible—to the outer world the long tale of her griefs and the
profound reasons for her dissatisfactions. She would enlarge upon them,
too, in a running “aside”, but not so that we could catch her words. She
called this practice—which, she imagined, must be infuriating,
“mortifying” as she herself put it, “vexing” to us—“saying low masses
all the blessed day.”

The last rites accomplished, Françoise, who was at one and the same
time, as in the primitive church, the celebrant and one of the faithful,
helped herself to a final glass, undid the napkin from her throat,
folded it after wiping from her lips a stain of watered wine and coffee,
slipped it into its ring, turned a doleful eye to thank “her” young
footman who, to shew his zeal in her service, was saying: “Come, ma’am,
a drop more of the grape; it’s d’licious to-day,” and went straight
across to the window, which she flung open, protesting that it was too
hot to breathe in “this wretched kitchen”. Dexterously casting, as she
turned the latch and let in the fresh air, a glance of studied
indifference into the courtyard below, she furtively elicited the
conclusion that the Duchess was not ready yet to start, brooded for a
moment with contemptuous, impassioned eyes over the waiting carriage,
and, this meed of attention once paid to the things of the earth, raised
them towards the heavens, whose purity 