 people. The Convention tried an appeal to their
republican passions, and they brought on the Reign of Terror. Napoleon
tried an appeal to their military passions, and he brought on the
subjugation of France by Europe. Louis Philippe, as the only remaining
resource, appealed to their selfish interests, and he induced the
revolution of 1848. Mankind cannot escape from the gentle influence of
moral obligations, but to fall under the reaction of conquest, the
debasement of corruption, or the government of force.

But all these governments, say the republicans, fell, because they
departed from the principles of the Revolution, and because they became
corrupted by power as soon as they had tasted its sweets. But even
supposing this were true,—supposing that Mirabeau, Danton, Robespierre,
Napoleon, and Louis Philippe were all overthrown, not because they took
the only method left open to them to preserve the support of the
senators, but because they departed from the principles of the
Revolution; do the republicans not see that the very announcement of
that fact is the most decisive condemnation of their system of
government? Do they expect to find liberals more eloquent than Mirabeau,
republicans more energetic than Danton, socialists more ardent than
Robespierre, generals more capable than Napoleon, citizen kings more
astute than Louis Philippe? Republican power must be committed to some
one. Mankind cannot exist an hour without a government: the first act of
the infuriated and victorious rabble in the Chamber of Deputies was to
name a Provisional one. But if experience has proved that intellect the
most powerful, patriotism the most ardent, genius the most transcendent,
penetration the most piercing, experience the most extensive, are
invariably shipwrecked amidst the temptations and the shoals of newly
acquired republican power, do they not see that it is not a form of
government adapted for the weakness of humanity; and that if the leaders
of revolution are not impelled to destruction by an external and
overbearing necessity, they are infallibly seduced into it by the
passions which, amidst the novelty of newly acquired power, arise in
their own breasts? In either case, a revolution government must
terminate in its own destruction,—in private sufferings and public
disasters; and so it will be with the government of M. Lamartine and
that of the new National Assembly, as it has been with all those which
have preceded it.

“Deus patiens,” says St Augustin, “quia æternus.”[13]—What an awful
commentary on this magnificent text have recent events afforded!
Eighteen years ago Louis Philippe forgot his loyalty and broke his oath;
the first prince of the blood elevated himself to power by successful
treason; he adopted, if he did not make, a revolution. He sent his
lawful monarch into exile; he prevented the placing the crown on the
head of his grandson; he for ever severed France from its lawful
sovereigns. What has been the result of his usurpation? Where are now
his enduring projects, his family alliances, his vast army, his
consolidated power? During seventeen years he laboured with
indefatigable industry and great ability to establish his newly acquired
authority, and secure, by the confirmation of his own power, the
perpetual exile of the lawful sovereign of France. Loud and long was the
applause at first bestowed by the liberal party in Europe on the
usurpation; great was the triumph of the bourgeoisie in every state at
seeing a lawful monarch overturned by a well-concerted urban revolt, and
the National converted into a Prætorian Guard, which could dispose of
crowns at pleasure. But meanwhile the justice of Heaven neither
slumbered nor slept. The means taken by Louis Philippe to consolidate
his power, and which were in truth the only ones that remained at his
disposal, consummated his ruin. His steady adherence to peace
dissatisfied the ardent spirits which sought for war; his firm internal
government disconcerted the republicans; his vast internal expenditure
drew after it a serious embarrassment of finance. He could not appeal to
the loyal feelings of the generous, for he was a usurper; he could not
rest on the support of the multitude, for they would have driven the
state to ruin; he could not rally the army round his throne, for they
would have impelled him into war. Thus he could rest only on the selfish
interests; and great was the skill with which he worked on that powerful
principle in human affairs. But a government which stands on selfish
feelings alone is a castle built on sand; the first wind of adversity
levels it with the dust. Napoleon’s throne was founded on this
principle, for he sacrificed to warlike selfishness; Louis Philippe on
the same, for he sacrificed to pacific selfishness. Both have undergone
the stern but just law of retribution. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, has been meted out to both. To Napoleon, who had sent so many
foreign princes into banishment, and subverted so many gallant states, a
defeat in the field, a melancholy exile, and unbefriended death, in a
foreign land; to Louis Philippe, who had dethroned his lawful sovereign,
and carried the standard of treason into the halls of the Tuilleries,
the fate which he allotted to Charles X., that of being expelled with
still greater ignominy from the _same halls_, being compelled to eat the
bread of the stranger, and see his dynasty driven from their usurped
throne amidst the derision and contempt of mankind.

“If absolute power,” says M. De Tocqueville, “shall re-establish itself
in whatever hands, in any of the democratic states of Europe, I have no
doubt it will assume a form unknown to our fathers. When the great
families and the spirit of clanship prevailed, the individual who had to
contend with tyranny never found himself alone—he was supported by his
clients, his relations, his friends. But when the estates are divided,
and races confounded, where shall we find the spirit of family? What
form will remain in the influences of habit among a people changing
perpetually, where every act of tyranny will find a precedent in
previous disorders, where every crime can be justified by an example;
where nothing exists of sufficient antiquity to render its destruction
an object of dread, and nothing can be figured so new that men are
afraid to engage in it? What resistance would manners afford which have
already received so many shocks? What would public opinion do, when
twenty persons do not exist bound together by any common tie; when you
can no more meet with a man, a family, a body corporate, or a class of
society, which could represent or act upon that opinion; where each
citizen is equally poor, equally impotent, equally isolated, _and can
only oppose his individual weakness to the organised strength of the
Central Government_? To figure any thing equal TO THE DESPOTISM which
would then be established amongst us, we would require to recur not to
our own annals; we would be forced to go back to those frightful periods
of tyranny, when, manners being corrupted, old recollections effaced,
habits destroyed, opinions wavering, liberty deprived of its asylum
under the laws, men made a sport of the people, and princes wore out the