ed with a magic as potent as the leathern sofa—without
inhaling the breezes peculiar to the Faubourg Saint-Germain was as
impossible as to take a siesta in the oasis of Figuig without thereby
being necessarily in Africa. Only imagination and belief can
differentiate from the rest certain objects, certain people, and can
create an atmosphere. Alas, those picturesque sites, those natural
accidents, those local curiosities, those works of art of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain, never probably should I be permitted to set my feet among
them. And I must content myself with a shiver of excitement as I
sighted, from the deep sea (and without the least hope of ever landing
there) like an outstanding minaret, like the first palm, like the first
signs of some exotic industry or vegetation, the well-trodden doormat of
its shore.

But if the Hôtel de Guermantes began for me at its hall-door, its
dependencies must be regarded as extending a long way farther, according
to the Duke, who, looking on all the other tenants as farmers, peasants,
purchasers of forfeited estates, whose opinion was of no account, shaved
himself every morning in his nightshirt at the window, came down into
the courtyard, according to the warmth or coldness of the day, in his
shirt-sleeves, in pyjamas, in a plaid coat of startling colours, with a
shaggy nap, in little light-coloured covert coats shorter than the
jackets beneath, and made one of his grooms lead past him at a trot some
horse that he had just been buying. More than once, indeed, the horse
broke the window of Jupien’s shop, whereupon Jupien, to the Duke’s
indignation, demanded compensation. “If it were only in consideration of
all the good that Madame la Duchesse does in the house, here, and in the
parish,” said M. de Guermantes, “it is an outrage on this fellow’s part
to claim a penny from us.” But Jupien had stuck to his point, apparently
not having the faintest idea what “good” the Duchess had ever done. And
yet she did do good, but—since one cannot do good to everybody at
once—the memory of the benefits that we have heaped on one person is a
valid reason for our abstaining from helping another, whose discontent
we thereby make all the stronger. From other points of view than that of
charity the quarter appeared to the Duke—and this over a considerable
area—to be only an extension of his courtyard, a longer track for his
horses. After seeing how a new acquisition trotted by itself he would
have it harnessed and taken through all the neighbouring streets, the
groom running beside the carriage holding the reins, making it pass to
and fro before the Duke who stood on the pavement, erect, gigantic,
enormous in his vivid clothes, a cigar between his teeth, his head in
the air, his eyeglass scrutinous, until the moment when he sprang on to
the box, drove the horse up and down for a little to try it, then set
off with his new turn-out to pick up his mistress in the Champs-Elysées.
M. de Guermantes bade good day, before leaving the courtyard, to two
couples who belonged more or less to his world; the first, some cousins
of his who, like working-class parents, were never at home to look after
their children, since every morning the wife went off to the Schola to
study counterpoint and fugue, and the husband to his studio to carve
wood and beat leather; and after them the Baron and Baronne de Norpois,
always dressed in black, she like a pew-opener and he like a mute at a
funeral, who emerged several times daily on their way to church. They
were the nephew and niece of the old Ambassador who was our friend, and
whom my father had, in fact, met at the foot of the staircase without
realising from where he came; for my father supposed that so important a
personage, one who had come in contact with the most eminent men in
Europe and was probably quite indifferent to the empty distinctions of
rank, was hardly likely to frequent the society of these obscure,
clerical and narrow-minded nobles. They had not been long in the place;
Jupien, who had come out into the courtyard to say a word to the husband
just as he was greeting M. de Guermantes, called him “M. Norpois,” not
being certain of his name.

“Monsieur Norpois, indeed! Oh, that really is good! Just wait a little!
This individual will be calling you Comrade Norpois next!” exclaimed M.
de Guermantes, turning to the Baron. He was at last able to vent his
spleen against Jupien who addressed him as “Monsieur,” instead of
“Monsieur le Duc.”

One day when M. de Guermantes required some information upon a matter of
which my father had professional knowledge, he had introduced himself to
him with great courtesy. After that, he had often some neighbourly
service to ask of my father and, as soon as he saw him begin to come
downstairs, his mind occupied with his work and anxious to avoid any
interruption, the Duke, leaving his stable-boys, would come up to him in
the courtyard, straighten the collar of his great-coat, with the
serviceable deftness inherited from a line of royal body-servants in
days gone by, take him by the hand, and, holding it in his own, patting
it even to prove to my father, with a courtesan’s or courtier’s
shamelessness, that he, the Duc de Guermantes, made no bargain about my
father’s right to the privilege of contact with the ducal flesh, lead
him, so to speak, on leash, extremely annoyed and thinking only how he
might escape, through the carriage entrance out into the street. He had
given us a sweeping bow one day when we had come in just as he was going
out in the carriage with his wife; he was bound to have told her my
name; but what likelihood was there of her remembering it, or my face
either? And besides, what a feeble recommendation to be pointed out
simply as being one of her tenants! Another, more valuable, would have
been my meeting the Duchess in the drawing-room of Mme. de Villeparisis,
who, as it happened, had just sent word by my grandmother that I was to
go and see her, and, remembering that I had been intending to go in for
literature, had added that I should meet several authors there. But my
father felt that I was still a little young to go into society, and as
the state of my health continued to give him uneasiness he did not see
the use of establishing precedents that would do me no good.

As one of Mme. de Guermantes’s footmen was in the habit of talking to
Françoise, I picked up the names of several of the houses which she
frequented, but formed no impression of any of them; from the moment in
which they were a part of her life, of that life which I saw only
through the veil of her name, were they not inconceivable?

“To-night there’s a big party with a Chinese shadow show at the
Princesse de Parme’s,” said the footman, “but we shan’t be going,
because at five o’clock Madame is taking the train to Chantilly, to
spend a few days with the Duc d’Aumale; but it’ll be the lady’s maid and
valet that are going with her. I’m to stay here. She won’t be at all
pleased, the Princesse de Parme won’t, that’s four times already she’s
written to Madame la Duchesse.”

“Then you won’t be going down to Guermantes Castle this year?”

“It’s the first time we shan’t be going there: it’s because of the
Duke’s rheumatics, the doctor says he’s not to go there till the hot
pipes are in, but we’ve been there every year till now, right on to
January. If the hot pipes aren’t ready, perhaps Madame will go for a few
days to Cannes, to the Duchesse de Guise, but nothing’s settled yet.”

“And to the theatre, do you go, sometimes?”

“We go now and then to the Opéra, usually on the evenings when the
Princesse de Parme has her box, that’s once a week; it seems it’s a fine
show they give there, plays, operas, everything. Madame refused to
subscribe to it herself, but we go all the same to the boxes Madame’s
friends take, one one night, another another, often with the Princesse
de Guermantes, the Duke’s cousin’s lady. She’s sister to the Duke of
Bavaria. And so you’ve got to run upstairs again now, have you?” went on
the footman, who, albeit identified with the Guermantes, looked upon
masters in general as a political estate, a view which allowed him to
treat Françoise with as much respect as if she too were in service with
a duchess. “You enjoy good health, ma’am.”

“Oh, if it wasn’t for these cursed legs of mine! On the plain I can
still get along” (“on the plain” meant in the courtyard or in the
streets, where Françoise had no objection to walking, in other words “on
a plane surface”) “but it’s these stairs that do me in, devil take them.
Good day to you, sir, see you again, perhaps, this evening.”

She was all the more anxious to continue her conversations with the
footman after he mentioned to her that the sons of dukes often bore a
princely title which they retained until their fathers were dead.
Evidently the cult of the nobility, blended with and accommodating
itself to a certain spirit of revolt against it, must, springing
hereditarily from the soil of France, be very strongly implanted still
in her people. For Françoise, to whom you might speak of the genius of
Napoleon or of wireless telegraphy without succeeding in attracting her
attention, and without her slackening for an instant the movements with
which she was scraping the ashes from the grate or laying the table, if
she were simply to be told these idiosyncrasies of nomenclature, and
that the younger son of the Duc de Guermantes was generally called
Prince d’Oléron, would at once exclaim: “That’s fine,