eeps alive with food which it catches, eats and digests
for them and of which it offers them the ultimate and easily assimilable
residue, Françoise lived with us in full community; it was we who, with
our virtues, our wealth, our style of living, must take on ourselves the
task of concocting those little sops to her vanity out of which was
formed—with the addition of the recognised rights of freely practising
the cult of the midday dinner according to the traditional custom, which
included a mouthful of air at the window when the meal was finished, a
certain amount of loitering in the street when she went out to do her
marketing, and a holiday on Sundays when she paid a visit to her
niece—the portion of happiness indispensable to her existence. And so it
can be understood that Françoise might well have succumbed in those
first days of our migration, a victim, in a house where my father’s
claims to distinction were not yet known, to a malady which she herself
called “wearying”, wearying in the active sense in which the word
_ennui_ is employed by Corneille, or in the last letters of soldiers who
end by taking their own lives because they are wearying for their girls
or for their native villages. Françoise’s wearying had soon been cured
by none other than Jupien, for he at once procured her a pleasure no
less keen, indeed more refined than she would have felt if we had
decided to keep a carriage. “Very good class, those Juliens,” (for
Françoise readily assimilated new names to those with which she was
already familiar) “very worthy people; you can see it written on their
faces.” Jupien was in fact able to understand, and to inform the world
that if we did not keep a carriage it was because we had no wish for
one. This new friend of Françoise was very little at home, having
obtained a post in one of the Government offices. A waistcoat-maker
first of all, with the “chit of a girl” whom my grandmother had taken
for his daughter, he had lost all interest in the exercise of that
calling after his assistant (who, when still little more than a child,
had shewn great skill in darning a torn skirt, that day when my
grandmother had gone to call on Mme. de Villeparisis) had turned to
ladies’ fashions and become a seamstress. A prentice hand, to begin
with, in a dressmaker’s workroom, set to stitch a seam, to fasten a
flounce, to sew on a button or to press a crease, to fix a waistband
with hooks and eyes, she had quickly risen to be second and then chief
assistant, and having formed a connexion of her own among ladies of
fashion now worked at home, that is to say in our courtyard, generally
with one or two of her young friends from the workroom, whom she had
taken on as apprentices. After this, Jupien’s presence in the place had
ceased to matter. No doubt the little girl (a big girl by this time) had
often to cut out waistcoats still. But with her friends to assist her
she needed no one besides. And so Jupien, her uncle, had sought
employment outside. He was free at first to return home at midday, then,
when he had definitely succeeded the man whose substitute only he had
begun by being, not before dinner-time. His appointment to the “regular
establishment” was, fortunately, not announced until some weeks after
our arrival, so that his courtesy could be brought to bear on her long
enough to help Françoise to pass through the first, most difficult phase
without undue suffering. At the same time, and without underrating his
value to Françoise as, so to speak, a sedative during the period of
transition, I am bound to say that my first impression of Jupien had
been far from favourable. At a little distance, entirely ruining the
effect that his plump cheeks and vivid colouring would otherwise have
produced, his eyes, brimming with a compassionate, mournful, dreamy
gaze, led one to suppose that he was seriously ill or had just suffered
a great bereavement. Not only was he nothing of the sort, but as soon as
he opened his mouth (and his speech, by the way, was perfect) he was
quite markedly cynical and cold. There resulted from this discord
between eyes and lips a certain falsity which was not attractive, and by
which he had himself the air of being made as uncomfortable as a guest
who arrives in morning dress at a party where everyone else is in
evening dress, or as a commoner who having to speak to a Royal Personage
does not know exactly how he ought to address him and gets round the
difficulty by cutting down his remarks to almost nothing. Jupien’s (here
the comparison ends) were, on the contrary, charming. Indeed,
corresponding possibly to this overflowing of his face by his eyes
(which one ceased to notice when one came to know him), I soon discerned
in him a rare intellect, and one of the most spontaneously literary that
it has been my privilege to come across, in the sense that, probably
without education, he possessed or had assimilated, with the help only
of a few books skimmed in early life, the most ingenious turns of
speech. The most gifted people that I had known had died young. And so I
was convinced that Jupien’s life would soon be cut short. Kindness was
among his qualities, and pity, the most delicate and the most generous
feelings for others. But his part in the life of Françoise had soon
ceased to be indispensable. She had learned to put up with understudies.

Indeed, when a tradesman or servant came to our door with a parcel or
message, while seeming to pay no attention and merely pointing vaguely
to an empty chair, Françoise so skilfully put to the best advantage the
few seconds that he spent in the kitchen, while he waited for Mamma’s
answer, that it was very seldom that the stranger went away without
having ineradicably engraved upon his memory the conviction that, if we
“did not have” any particular thing, it was because we had “no wish” for
it. If she made such a point of other people’s knowing that we “had
money” (for she knew nothing of what Saint-Loup used to call partitive
articles, and said simply “have money”, “fetch water”), of their
realising that we were rich, it was not because riches with nothing else
besides, riches without virtue, were in her eyes the supreme good in
life; but virtue without riches was not her ideal either. Riches were
for her, so to speak, a necessary condition of virtue, failing which
virtue itself would lack both merit and charm. She distinguished so
little between them that she had come in time to invest each with the
other’s attributes, to expect some material comfort from virtue, to
discover something edifying in riches.

As soon as she had shut the window again, which she did
quickly—otherwise Mamma would, it appeared, have heaped on her “every
conceivable insult”—Françoise began with many groans and sighs to put
straight the kitchen table.

“There are some Guermantes who stay in the Rue de la Chaise,” began my
father’s valet; “I had a friend who used to be with them; he was their
second coachman. And I know a fellow, not my old pal, but his
brother-in-law, who did his time in the Army with one of the Baron de
Guermantes’s stud grooms. Does your mother know you’re out?” added the
valet, who was in the habit, just as he used to hum the popular airs of
the season, of peppering his conversation with all the latest
witticisms.

Françoise, with the tired eyes of an ageing woman, eyes which moreover
saw everything from Combray, in a hazy distance, made out not the
witticism that underlay the words, but that there must be something
witty in them since they bore no relation to the rest of his speech and
had been uttered with considerable emphasis by one whom she knew to be a
joker. She smiled at him, therefore, with an air of benevolent
bewilderment, as who should say: “Always the same, that Victor!” And she
was genuinely pleased, knowing that listening to smart sayings of this
sort was akin—if remotely—to those reputable social pleasures for which,
in every class of society, people make haste to dress themselves in
their best and run the risk of catching cold. Furthermore, she believed
the valet to be a friend after her own heart, for he never left off
denouncing, with fierce indignation, the appalling measures which the
Republic was about to enforce against the clergy. Françoise had not yet
learned that our cruellest adversaries are not those who contradict and
try to convince us, but those who magnify or invent reports which may
make us unhappy, taking care not to include any appearance of
justification, which might lessen our discomfort, and perhaps give us
some slight regard for a party which they make a point of displaying to
us, to complete our torment, as being at once terrible and triumphant.

“The Duchess must be connected with all that lot,” said Françoise,
bringing the conversation back to the Guermantes of the Rue de la
Chaise, as one plays a piece over again from the andante. “I can’t
recall who it was told me that one of them had married a cousin of the
Duke. It’s the same kindred, anyway. Ay, they’re a great family, the
Guermantes!” she added, in a tone of respect, founding the greatness of
the family at once on the number of its branches and the brilliance of
its connexions, as Pascal founds the truth of Religion on Reason and on
the Authority of the Scriptures. For since there was but the single word
“great” to express both meanings, it seemed to her that they formed a
single idea, her vocabulary, like cut stones sometimes, shewing thus on
certain of its facets a flaw which projected a ray of darkness into the
recesses of her mind. “I wonder now if it wouldn’t be them that have
their castle at Guermantes, not a score of miles from Combray; then they
must be kin to their cousin at Algiers, too.” My mother and I long asked
ourselves who this cousin at Algiers could be until finally we
discovered that Françoise meant by the name “Algiers” the town of
Angers. What is far off may be more familiar to us than what is quite
near. Françoise, who knew the name “Algiers” from some particularly
unpleasant dates that used to be given us at the New Year, had never
heard of Angers. Her language, like the French language itself, and
especially that of place-names, was thickly strewn with errors. “I meant
to talk to their butler about it. What is it again you call him?” she
interrupted herself as though putting a formal question as to the
correct procedure, which she went on to answer with: “Oh, of course,
it’s Antoine you call him!” as though Antoine had been a title. “He’s
the one who could tell me, but he’s quite the gentleman, he is, a great
scholar, you’ld say they’d cut his tongue out, or that he’d forgotten to
learn to speak. He makes no response when you talk to him,” went on
Françoise, who used “make response” in the same sense as Mme. de
Sévigné. “But,” she added, quite untruthfully, “so long as I know what’s
boiling in my pot, I don’t bother my head about what’s in other
people’s. Whatever he is, he’s not a Catholic. Besides, he’s not a
courageous man.” (This criticism might have led one to suppose that
Françoise had changed her mind about physical bravery which, according
to her, in Combray days, lowered men to the level of wild beasts. But it
was not so. “Courageous” meant simply a hard worker.) “They do say, too,
that he’s thievish as a magpie, but it doesn’t do to believe all one
hears. The servants never stay long there because of the lodge; the
porters are jealous and set the Duchess against them. But it’s safe to
say that he’s a real twister, that Antoine, and his Antoinesse is no
better,” concluded Françoise, who, in furnishing the name “Antoine” with
a feminine ending that would designate the butler’s wife, was inspired,
no doubt, in her act of word-formation by an unconscious memory of the
words _chanoine_ and _chanoinesse_. If so, she was not far wrong. There
is still a street near Notre-Dame called Rue Chanoinesse, a name which
must have been given to it (since it was never inhabited by any but male
Canons) by those Frenchmen of olden days of whom Françoise was, properly
speaking, the contemporary. She proceeded, moreover, at once to furnish
another example of this way of forming feminine endings, for she went
on: “But one thing sure and certain is that it’s the Duchess that has
Guermantes Castle. And it’s she that is the Lady Mayoress down in those
parts. That’s always something.”

“I can well believe that it is something,” came with conviction from the
footman, who had not detected the irony.

“You think so, do you, my boy, you think it’s something? Why, for folk
like them to be Mayor and Mayoress, it’s just thank you for nothing. Ah,
if it was mine, that Guermantes Castle, you wouldn’t see me setting foot
in Paris, I can tell you. I’m sure a family who’ve got something to go
on with, like Monsieur and Madame here, must have queer ideas to stay on
in this wretched town rather than get away down to Combray the moment
they’re free to start, and no one hindering them. Why do they put off
retiring? They’ve got everything they want. Why wait till they’re dead?
Ah, if I had only a crust of dry bread to eat and a faggot to keep me
warm in winter, a fine time I’ld have of it at home in my brother’s poor
old house at Combray. Down there you do feel you’re alive; you haven’t
all these houses stuck up in front of you, there is so little noise at
night-time, you can hear the frogs singing five miles off and more.”

“That must indeed be fine!” exclaimed the young footman with enthusiasm,
as though this last attraction had been as peculiar to Combray as the
gondola is to Venice. A more recent arrival in the household than my
father’s valet, he used to talk to Françoise about things which might
interest not himself so much as her. And Françoise, whose face wrinkled
up in disgust when she was treated as a mere cook, had for the young
footman, who referred to her always as the “housekeeper”, that peculiar
tenderness which Princes not of the blood royal feel towards the
well-meaning young men who dignify them with a “Highness”.

“At any rate one knows what one’s about, there, and what time of year it
is. It isn’t like here where you won’t find one wretched buttercup
flowering at holy Easter any more than you would at Christmas, and I
can’t hear so much as the tiniest angelus ring when I lift my old bones
out of bed in the morning. Down there, you can hear every hour; there’s
only the one poor bell, but you say to yourself: ‘My brother will be
coming in from the field now,’ and you watch the daylight fade, and the
bell rings to bless the fruits of the earth, and you have time to take a
turn before you light the lamp. But here it’s day time and it’s night
time, and you go to bed, and you can’t say any more than the dumb beasts
what you’ve been about all day.”

“I gather Méséglise is a fine place, too, Madame,” broke in the young
footman, who found that the conversation was becoming a little too
abstract for his liking, and happened to remember having heard us, at
table, mention Méséglise.

“Oh! Méséglise, is it?” said Françoise with the broad smile which one
could always bring to her lips by uttering any of those names—Méséglise,
Combray, Tansonville. They were so intimate a part of her life that she
felt, on meeting them outside it, on hearing them used in conversation,
a hilarity more or less ak