 that I saw before me, contained in that small
compass, as in a shell, between its twin valves that glowed with roseate
nacre.

My father had a friend at the Ministry, one A. J. Moreau, who, to
distinguish him from the other Moreaus, took care always to prefix both
initials to his name, with the result that people called him, for short,
“A. J.” Well, somehow or other, this A. J. found himself entitled to a
stall at the Opéra-Comique on a gala night; he sent the ticket to my
father, and as Berma, whom I had not been again to see since my first
disappointment, was to give an act of _Phèdre_, my grandmother persuaded
my father to pass it on to me.

To tell the truth, I attached no importance to this possibility of
hearing Berma which, a few years earlier, had plunged me in such a state
of agitation. And it was not without a sense of melancholy that I
realised the fact of my indifference to what at one time I had put
before health, comfort, everything. It was not that there had been any
slackening of my desire for an opportunity to contemplate close at hand
the precious particles of reality of which my imagination caught a
broken glimpse. But my imagination no longer placed these in the diction
of a great actress; since my visits to Elstir, it was on certain
tapestries, certain modern paintings that I had brought to bear the
inner faith I had once had in this acting, in this tragic art of Berma;
my faith, my desire, no longer coming forward to pay incessant worship
to the diction, the attitudes of Berma, the counterpart that I possessed
of them in my heart had gradually perished, like those other
counterparts of the dead in ancient Egypt which had to be fed
continually in order to maintain their originals in eternal life. This
art had become a feeble, tawdry thing. No deep-lying soul inhabited it
any more.

That evening, as, armed with the ticket my father had received from his
friend, I was climbing the grand staircase of the Opera, I saw in front
of me a man whom I took at first for M. de Charlus, whose bearing he
had; when he turned his head to ask some question of one of the staff I
saw that I had been mistaken, but I had no hesitation in placing the
stranger in the same class of society, from the way not only in which he
was dressed but in which he spoke to the man who took the tickets and to
the box-openers who were keeping him waiting. For, apart from personal
details of similarity, there was still at this period between any smart
and wealthy man of that section of the nobility and any smart and
wealthy man of the world of finance or “big business” a strongly marked
difference. Where one of the latter would have thought he was giving
proof of his exclusiveness by adopting a sharp, haughty tone in speaking
to an inferior, the great gentleman, affable, pleasant, smiling, had the
air of considering, practising an affectation of humility and patience,
a pretence of being just one of the audience, as a privilege of his good
breeding. It is quite likely that, on seeing him thus dissemble behind a
smile overflowing with good nature the barred threshold of the little
world apart which he carried in his person, more than one wealthy
banker’s son, entering the theatre at that moment, would have taken this
great gentleman for a person of no importance if he had not remarked in
him an astonishing resemblance to the portrait that had recently
appeared in the illustrated papers of a nephew of the Austrian Emperor,
the Prince of Saxony, who happened to be in Paris at the time. I knew
him to be a great friend of the Guermantes. As I reached the attendant I
heard the Prince of Saxony (or his double) say with a smile: “I don’t
know the number; it was my cousin who told me I had only to ask for her
box.”

He may well have been the Prince of Saxony; it was perhaps of the
Duchesse de Guermantes (whom, in that event, I should be able to watch
in the process of living one of those moments of her unimaginable life
in her cousin’s box) that his eyes formed a mental picture when he
referred to “my cousin who told me I had only to ask for her box,” so
much so that that smiling gaze peculiar to himself, those so simple
words caressed my heart (far more gently than would any abstract
meditation) with the alternative feelers of a possible happiness and a
vague distinction. Whatever he was, in uttering this sentence to the
attendant he grafted upon a commonplace evening in my everyday life a
potential outlet into a new world; the passage to which he was directed
after mentioning the word “box” and along which he now proceeded was
moist and mildewed and seemed to lead to subaqueous grottoes, to the
mythical kingdom of the water-nymphs. I had before me a gentleman in
evening dress who was walking away from me, but I kept playing upon and
round him, as with a badly fitting reflector on a lamp, and without ever
succeeding in making it actually coincide with him, the idea that he was
the Prince of Saxony and was on his way to join the Duchesse de
Guermantes. And, for all that he was alone, that idea, external to
himself, impalpable, immense, unstable as the shadow projected by a
magic lantern, seemed to precede and guide him like that deity,
invisible to the rest of mankind, who stands beside the Greek warrior in
the hour of battle.

I took my seat, striving all the time to recapture a line from _Phèdre_
which I could not quite remember. In the form in which I repeated it to
myself it had not the right number of feet, but as I made no attempt to
count them, between its unwieldiness and a classical line of poetry it
seemed as though no common measure could exist. It would not have
surprised me to learn that I must subtract at least half a dozen
syllables from that portentous phrase to reduce it to alexandrine
dimensions. But suddenly I remembered it, the irremediable asperities of
an inhuman world vanished as if by magic; the syllables of the line at
once filled up the requisite measure, what there was in excess floated
off with the ease, the dexterity of a bubble of air that rises to burst
on the water’s brink. And, after all, this excrescence with which I had
been struggling consisted of but a single foot.

A certain number of orchestra stalls had been offered for sale at the
box office and bought, out of snobbishness or curiosity, by such as
wished to study the appearance of people whom they might not have
another opportunity of seeing at close quarters. And it was indeed a
fragment of their true social life, ordinarily kept secret, that one
could examine here in public, for, the Princesse de Parme having herself
distributed among her friends the seats in stalls, balconies and boxes,
the house was like a drawing-room in which everyone changed his place,
went to sit here or there wherever he caught sight of a woman whom he
knew.

Next to me were some common people who, not knowing the regular
subscribers, were anxious to shew that they were capable of identifying
them and named them aloud. They went on to remark that these subscribers
behaved there as though they were in their own drawing-rooms, meaning
that they paid no attention to what was being played. Which was the
exact opposite of what did happen. A budding genius who has taken a
stall in order to hear Berma thinks only of not soiling his gloves, of
not disturbing, of making friends with the neighbour whom chance has put
beside him, of pursuing with an intermittent smile the fugitive—avoiding
with apparent want of politeness the intercepted gaze of a person of his
acquaintance whom he has discovered in the audience and to whom, after a
thousand indecisions, he makes up his mind to go and talk just as the
three hammer-blows from the stage, sounding before he has had time to
reach his friend, force him to take flight, like the Hebrews in the Red
Sea, through a heaving tide of spectators and spectatresses whom he has
obliged to rise and whose dresses he tears as he passes, or tramples on
their boots. On the other hand it was because the society people sat in
their boxes (behind the general terrace of the balcony, as in so many
little drawing-rooms, the fourth walls of which had been removed, or in
so many little cafés, to which one might go for refreshment, without
letting oneself be intimidated by the mirrors in gilt frames or the red
plush seats, in the Neapolitan style, of the establishment), it was
because they rested an indifferent hand on the gilded shafts of the
columns which upheld this temple of the lyric art, it was because they
remained unmoved by the extravagant honours which seemed to be being
paid them by a pair of carved figures which held out towards the boxes
branches of palm and laurel, that they and they only would have had
minds free to listen to the play, if only they had had minds.

At first there was nothing visible but vague shadows, in which one
suddenly struck—like the gleam of a precious stone which one cannot
see—the phosphorescence of a pair of famous eyes, or, like a medallion
of Henri IV on a dark background, the bent profile of the Duc d’Aumale,
to whom an invisible lady was exclaiming “Monseigneur must allow me to
take his coat,” to which the Prince replied, “Oh, come, come! Really,
Madame d’Ambresac.” She took it, in spite of this vague prohibition, and
was envied by all the rest her being thus honoured.

But in the other boxes, everywhere almost, the white deities who
inhabited those sombre abodes had flown for shelter against their
shadowy walls and remained invisible. Gradually, however, as the
performance went on, their vaguely human form