ion of Marshal Bugeaud, rendered it impossible to act at
  all. If this be, as we have every reason to believe it is, a correct
  narrative of these transactions, we are not surprised that M. Thiers
  and his colleagues should not have made themselves conspicuous in the
  subsequent passage of this Revolution.

  “The mob of Paris, at no hour of the day, (the 24th,) was formidable
  to ten thousand men, much less to a hundred thousand, or at least
  eighty thousand. On the Thursday (24th) public opinion had abandoned
  the _émeute_. _The National Guard would now have done any thing to
  reproduce order, but they had no time_; there was no opportunity to
  reunite themselves; besides which, they wanted courage and support,
  and did not _even dream of the extreme to which things might be
  pushed_. There never was, at any time, any _acharnement_ among the
  people; the troops were every where well received; not a hostile head
  looked from a window. It was hoped that something might be done by a
  demonstration of public opinion, but nothing more. The _émeutiers_ the
  first and second day simply took advantage of the absence of the
  National Guard. They were all the time ill looked upon by the real
  people of Paris, but they were permitted to go on as a means of action
  on the court and government. The accident, or rather the gross and
  infamous blunder, committed before the Bureau des Affaires Etrangères
  (of which the accounts published are erroneous), produced a violent
  irritation, which was ably worked upon by the Republican committee,
  who were all along on the watch; but this irritation, which certainly
  changed the character of the contest, gave no arms to the people; and
  although it increased their numbers, they were never, even
  numerically, formidable, as I have said, to ten thousand men. As for
  the barricades, there was not one that was ever defended except
  against some weak patrol, and then, after a little popping, it was
  always abandoned. Literally, there was no fighting; there was
  skirmishing on the part of the brave Municipals—the only force that
  acted—and I presume it acted on orders which did not emanate from the
  chief military authority, but had some separate and general
  instructions of its own. Literally, I repeat, there was no fighting.
  How could there be? There were no arms; that is, not a musket to a
  hundred men, till eleven or twelve o-clock in the day, when the
  troops, without orders—except “not to fire,” or act against the
  people—became, in several parts of Paris, mixed up and united with
  them.”—_Times_, March 8 and 14, 1848.


Here, then, is the whole affair clearly revealed. It was the timidity of
Government, and the defection of the National Guard, which ruined every
thing; which paralysed the troops of the line, encouraged the
insurgents, left the brave Municipal Guards to their fate, and caused
the surrender of the Tuileries. And what has been the result of this
shameful treachery on the part of the sworn defenders of order—this
“_civic_” prætorian guard of France? Nothing but this, that they have
destroyed the monarchy, ruined industry, banished capital, rendered
freedom hopeless, and made bankrupt the state! Such are the effects of
armed men forgetting the first of social duties, that of fidelity to
their oaths. How soon were these treacherous National Guards passed in
the career of revolution by the infuriated rabble! How soon were Odillon
Barrot and Thiers supplanted by Lamartine and Arago! How rapidly were
the Duchess of Orleans and the Count of Paris expelled at the point of
the bayonet from the Chamber of Deputies—the cry for reform drowned in
that of revolution! How many of the twenty thousand National Guards, who
by their treachery brought about the Revolution, will be solvent at the
end of two months? Not a tenth of their number. They will perish
deservedly and ignobly; ruined in their fortunes, beggared in their
families, despised by their compatriots, execrated by Europe! That they
may anticipate what history will say of their conduct, let them listen
to the verdict which it _has_ pronounced on the National Guard which, on
a similar crisis, 10th August 1792, betrayed Louis XVI., as pronounced
by an authority whom they will not suspect of leaning to the Royalist
side—M. Lamartine.

“The National Guard, on the 10th August, returned humiliated and in
consternation to their shops and counting-houses; _they had justly lost
the lead of the people_. Thenceforth it could no longer aspire but to be
the parade force of the Revolution, compelled to assist at all its acts,
at all its fêtes, _at all its crimes; a vain living decoration of all
the mechanists of the Revolution_.”[9]

Of which revolution is Lamartine now speaking; of that of 10th August
1792, or of 24th February 1848? Beyond all doubt history will pass a
severer judgment on the treachery which overthrew Louis Philippe than on
that which consummated the destruction of Louis XVI.: for the former had
the example of the latter for its guide; they knew how soon the massacre
of September followed the triumph of August, and what incalculable
calamities the defection of their predecessors in the Place Carousel
brought upon their country and Europe.

What benefit have the working classes derived, or are they likely to
derive, from this deplorable convulsion? Great ones they doubtless
expect, as it has issued in a triumph of labour over capital. But what
has it realised? We shall mention one or two particulars to illustrate
the benefits hitherto reaped by this class from its victory.

The savings’ banks of France had prospered immensely under the firm and
pacific government of Louis Philippe. The following account of them is
derived from official sources.


  “The state of the savings’ banks in France at the time of the
  Revolution indicated an extraordinary degree of confidence in the
  stability of the late government. In 1834 there were only seventy
  savings’ banks in France, and the amount of deposits on hand was
  34,000,000 francs. In 1839 there were four hundred and four banks, and
  the deposits had increased to 171,000,000 francs; in 1848, at the
  moment of the Revolution, the deposits had risen to 355,000,000
  francs, or ten times the amount deposited fourteen years before. In
  1839 the average value of each deposit was 550 francs, which is
  probably increased to 600 francs average at the present time. The
  partial suspension of payment by these institutions must affect at
  least half a million of persons of the most industrious and economical
  part of the population, chiefly belonging to the towns, and they are
  deprived of a large portion of their savings at the very moment they
  most need them.”—_Times_, March 14, 1848.


Now, these savings’ banks, holding deposits to the amount of about
£14,000,000 at the commencement of the Revolution, and which had
increased _tenfold_ during Louis Philippe’s reign, have to all practical
purposes _been rendered bankrupt_. Unable to stand the dreadful run upon
them after the outbreak, or to realise the amount of their deposits by
the sale of their funded property, in consequence of its prodigious
fall, they had no resource but to suspend payment. By a decree of
Government, the holders of deposits in the savings’ banks are to receive
only _a tenth_ in cash, the remainder being payable six months hence, in
a paper now practically worth nothing. By this single result of the
Revolution, above five hundred thousand of the most meritorious and
hard-working of the operatives of France have been in effect deprived of
the savings of a whole lifetime.

Nor is the condition of the labouring population in any degree more
favoured. In the _Times_ correspondent from Paris of March 14, we find
the following account of their present condition:—


  “The financial question, the state of trade and commerce, and the task
  of providing work and food for the people, with which the government
  has charged itself, are additional motives for seriousness, however.
  The credit of more than one banking-house is to-day said to be
  tottering. One firm, it is openly mentioned, has resolved to stop
  payment to-morrow. Trade is very bad. Work will soon become scarce,
  and distress and outcry must be expected; and with the knowledge of
  all these facts, and with the determination to do every thing possible
  for the relief of the working classes, possessed by the Provisional
  Government, this source of uneasiness is menacing to-day. I wish a
  more cheerful view of the situation of affairs were more general than
  it is, for it might check the departure of rich natives and foreigners
  from the capital, who _continue to retire from it in alarming
  numbers_, and, obviously, with no view to return, for we hear of sales
  of carriages and horses, for a _fifth part of the value_ they bore
  three weeks since. _Twelve thousand servants are said to be already
  discharged_ in Paris, and many houses or hotels in the fashionable
  quarters have become literally devoid of occupants.”—_Times_, 14th
  March 1848.


That such a state of things must in the end terminate in do