 the loyalty of the troops of the line, explain, if they can,
the benefit _they_ are likely to derive from this triumph of Socialism
over Bourgeoisie, of labour over capital, of numbers over property. The
Revolution was the work of their hands, and they must reap its fruits,
_as unquestionably they will bear its responsibility_. It is of more
importance for us in this country to inquire how the promises made by
government, and the expectations formed by the people, are to be
realised in the present social and political state of France. Already,
before the _Io Pæans_ upon the fall of the Orleans dynasty have ceased,
the difficulties of the new government in this respect have proclaimed
themselves. Columns of _ten and fifteen_ thousand workmen daily wait on
the administration to insist on the immediate recognition of the rights
of labour: their demands were promptly acceded to by the decree of 3d
March, which fixes the hours of labour in Paris at _ten_ hours a-day,
_and in the provinces at eleven_ hours. They were formerly eleven hours
in Paris and twelve in the provinces. This is quite intelligible: it is
reasonable that the Civil Prætorian Guards of the capital should work
less than the serfs of the provinces. Cutting off an hour’s labour over
a whole country would be deemed a pretty serious matter in
“l’industrieuse Angleterre:” but on the other side of the Channel, we
suppose, it is a mere bagatelle, important chiefly as showing from what
quarter the wind sets. Other prognostics of coming events are already
visible. Monster meetings of operatives and workmen in and around Paris
continue to be held in the Champs de Mars, to take the interests and
rights of labour into consideration: it is probable that they will still
further reduce the hours of toil, and proportionately raise its wages.
Already the stone-cutters have insisted on a minimum of pay and maximum
of work, and got it. Eight hours a-day, and ten sous an hour, is their
ultimatum. The journalists early clamoured for the immediate removal of
all duties affecting them. They succeeded in shaking off their burdens;
other classes will not be slow in following their example. Meanwhile
government is burdened, as in the worst days of the first Revolution,
with the maintenance of an immense body of citizens with arms in their
hands, and very little bread to put into their mouths. How to feed this
immense body, with resources continually failing, from the terrors of
capital, the flight of the English from Paris, and the diminished
expenditure of all the wealthier classes, would, according to the former
maxims of government, have been deemed a matter of no small difficulty.
But we suppose the regenerators of society have discovered some method
of arriving, with railway speed, at public opulence amidst private
suffering.

The melancholy progress of the first Revolution has naturally made
numbers of persons, not intimately acquainted with its events,
apprehensive of the immediate return of the Reign of Terror and the
restoration of the guillotine into its terrible and irresistible
sovereignty in France. Without disputing that there is much danger in
the present excited and disjointed state of the population of that
country, there are several reasons which induce us to believe that such
an event is not very probable, at least in the _first instance_, and
that it is from a different quarter that the real danger that now
threatens France is, in the outset at least, to be apprehended.

In the first place, although the Reign of Terror is over, and few indeed
of the actual witnesses are still in existence, yet the recollection of
it will never pass away: it has affixed a stain to the cause of
revolution which will never be effaced, but which its subsequent leaders
are most anxious to be freed from. Its numerous tragic scenes—its
frightful atrocity—its heroic suffering, have indelibly sunk into the
minds of men. To the end of the world, they will interest and melt every
succeeding age. The young will ever find them the most engrossing and
attractive theme,—the middle-aged, the most important subject of
reflection,—the old, the most delightful means of renewing the emotions
of youth. History is never weary of recording its bloody
catastrophes,—romance has already arrayed them with the colours of
poetry,—the drama will ere long seize upon them as the finest subjects
that human events have ever furnished for the awakening of tragic
emotion. They will be as immortal in story as the heroes of the Iliad,
the woes of the Atrides, the catastrophe of Œdipus, the death of Queen
Mary. So strongly have these fascinating tragedies riveted the attention
of mankind, that nothing has ever created so powerful a moral barrier
against the encroachments of democracy. The royal, like the Christian
martyrs, have lighted a fire which, by the grace of God, will never be
extinguished. So strongly are the popular leaders in every country
impressed with the moral effects of these catastrophes, that their first
efforts are always now directed to clear every successive convulsion of
their damning influence. Guizot and Lafayette, at the hazard of their
lives, in December 1830, saved Prince Polignac and M. Peyronnet from the
guillotine; and the first act of the Provisional Government of France in
1848, to their honour be it said, was to proclaim the abolition of the
punishment of death for political offences, in order to save, as they
intended, M. Guizot himself.

In the next place, the bloodshed and confiscation of the first
Revolution have, as subsequent writers have repeatedly demonstrated, so
completely extinguished the elements of national resistance in France,
that the dangers which threatened its progress and ensanguined its steps
no longer exist. It was no easy matter to overturn the monarchy and
church of old France. It was interwoven with the noblest, because the
most disinterested feelings of our nature,—it touched the chords of
religion and loyalty,—it was supported by historic names, and the lustre
of ancient descent,—it rested on the strongest and most dignified
attachments of modern times. The overthrow of such a fabric, like the
destruction of the monarchy of Great Britain at this time, could not be
effected but by the shedding of torrents of blood. Despite the
irresolution of the king, the defection of the army, the conquest of the
capital, and the emigration of the noblesse, accordingly, a most
desperate resistance arose in the provinces; and the revolution was
consolidated only by the _mitrillades_ of Lyons and Toulon, the
_noyades_ of the Loire, the proscriptions of the Convention, the blood
of La Vendée. France was not then enslaved by its capital. But now these
elements of resistance to the government of the dominant multitude at
Paris no longer exist. The nobles have been destroyed and their estates
confiscated; the clergy are reduced to humble stipendia