
“How did I hear of Méséglise? But it’s a well-known place; people have
told me about it—yes, over and over again,” he assured her with that
criminal inexactitude of the informer who, whenever we attempt to form
an impartial estimate of the importance that a thing which matters to us
may have for other people, makes it impossible for us to succeed.

“I can tell you, it’s better down there, under the cherry-trees, than
standing before the fire all day.”

She spoke to them even of Eulalie as a good person. For since Eulalie’s
death Françoise had completely forgotten that she had loved her as
little in her life time as she loved every one whose cupboard was bare,
who was dying of hunger, and after that came, like a good for nothing,
thanks to the bounty of the rich, to “put on airs”. It no longer pained
her that Eulalie had so skilfully managed, Sunday after Sunday, to
secure her “trifle” from my aunt. As for the latter, Françoise never
left off singing her praises.

“But it was at Combray, surely, that you used to be, with a cousin of
Madame?” asked the young footman.

“Yes, with Mme. Octave—oh, a dear, good, holy woman, my poor friends,
and a house where there was always enough and to spare, and all of the
very best, a good woman, you may well say, who had no pity on the
partridges, or the pheasants, or anything; you might turn up five to
dinner or six, it was never the meat that was lacking, and of the first
quality too, and white wine, and red wine, and everything you could
wish.” (Françoise used the word “pity” in the sense given it by La
Bruyère.) “It was she that paid the damages, always, even if the family
stayed for months and years.” (This reflexion was not really a slur upon
us, for Françoise belonged to an epoch when the word “damages” was not
restricted to a legal use and meant simply expense.) “Ah, I can tell
you, people didn’t go empty away from that house. As his reverence the
Curé has told us, many’s the time, if there ever was a woman who could
count on going straight before the Throne of God, it was she. Poor
Madame, I can hear her saying now, in the little voice she had: ‘You
know, Françoise, I can eat nothing myself, but I want it all to be just
as nice for the others as if I could.’ They weren’t for her, the
victuals, you may be quite sure. If you’d only seen her, she weighed no
more than a bag of cherries; there wasn’t that much of her. She would
never listen to a word I said, she would never send for the doctor. Ah,
it wasn’t in that house that you’ld have to gobble down your dinner. She
liked her servants to be fed properly. Here, it’s been just the same
again to-day; we haven’t had time for so much as to break a crust of
bread; everything goes like ducks and drakes.”

What annoyed her more than anything were the rusks of pulled bread that
my father used to eat. She was convinced that he had them simply to give
himself airs and to keep her “dancing”. “I can tell you frankly,” the
young footman assured her, “that I never saw the like.” He said it as if
he had seen everything, and as if in him the range of a millennial
experience extended over all countries and their customs, among which
was not anywhere to be found a custom of eating pulled bread. “Yes,
yes,” the butler muttered, “but that will all be changed; the men are
going on strike in Canada, and the Minister told Monsieur the other
evening that he’s clearing two hundred thousand francs out of it.” There
was no note of censure in his tone, not that he was not himself entirely
honest, but since he regarded all politicians as unsound the crime of
peculation seemed to him less serious than the pettiest larceny. He did
not even stop to ask himself whether he had heard this historic
utterance aright, and was not struck by the improbability that such a
thing would have been admitted by the guilty party himself to my father
without my father’s immediately turning him out of the house. But the
philosophy of Combray made it impossible for Françoise to expect that
the strikes in Canada could have any repercussion on the use of pulled
bread. “So long as the world goes round, look, there’ll be masters to
keep us on the trot, and servants to do their bidding.” In disproof of
this theory of perpetual motion, for the last quarter of an hour my
mother (who probably did not employ the same measures of time as
Françoise in reckoning the duration of the latter’s dinner) had been
saying:

“What on earth can they be doing? They’ve been at least two hours at
their dinner.”

And she rang timidly three or four times. Françoise, “her” footman, the
butler heard the bell ring, not as a summons to themselves, and with no
thought of answering it, but rather like the first sounds of the
instruments being tuned when the next part of a concert is just going to
begin, and one knows that there will be only a few minutes more of
interval. And so, when the peals were repeated and became more urgent,
our servants began to pay attention, and, judging that they had not much
time left and that the resumption of work was at hand, at a peal
somewhat louder than the rest gave a collective sigh and went their
several ways, the footman slipping downstairs to smoke a cigarette
outside the door, Françoise, after a string of reflexions on ourselves,
such as: “They’ve got the jumps to-day, surely,” going up to put her
things tidy in her attic, while the butler, having supplied himself
first with note-paper from my bedroom, polished off the arrears of his
private correspondence.

Despite the apparent stiffness of their butler, Françoise had been in a
position, from the first, to inform me that the Guermantes occupied
their mansion by virtue not of an immemorial right but of a quite recent
tenancy, and that the garden over which it looked on the side that I did
not know was quite small and just like all the gardens along the street;
and I realised at length that there were not to be seen there pit and
gallows or fortified mill, secret chamber, pillared dovecot, manorial
bakehouse or tithe-barn, dungeon or drawbridge, or fixed bridge either
for that matter, any more than toll-houses or pinnacles, charters,
muniments, ramparts or commemorative mounds. But just as Elstir, when
the bay of Balbec, losing its mystery, had become for me simply a
portion, interchangeable with any other, of the total quantity of salt
water distributed over the earth’s surface, had suddenly restored to it
a personality of its own by telling me that it was the gulf of opal
painted by Whistler in his “Harmonies in Blue and Silver”, so the name
Guermantes had seen perish under the strokes of Françoise’s hammer the
last of the dwellings that had issued from its syllables when one day an
old friend of my father said to us, speaking of the Duchess: “She is the
first lady in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; hers is the leading house in
the Faubourg Saint-German.” No doubt the most exclusive drawing-room,
the leading house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain was little or nothing
after all those other mansions of which in turn I had dreamed. And yet
in this one too, (and it was to be the last of the series) there was
something, however humble, quite apart from its material components, a
secret differentiation.

And it became all the more essential that I should be able to explore in
the drawing-room of Mme. de Guermantes, among her friends, the mystery
of her name, since I did not find it in her person when I saw her leave
the house in the morning on foot, or in the afternoon in her carriage.
Once before, indeed, in the church at Combray, she had appeared to me in
the blinding flash of a transfiguration, with cheeks irreducible to,
impenetrable by the colour of the name Guermantes and of afternoons on
the banks of the Vivonne, taking the place of my shattered dream like a
swan or willow into which has been changed a god or nymph, and which
henceforward, subjected to natural laws, will glide over the water or be
shaken by the wind. And yet, when that radiance had vanished, hardly had
I lost sight of it before it formed itself again, like the green and
rosy afterglow of sunset after the sweep of the oar that has broken it,
and in the solitude of my thoughts the name had quickly appropriated to
itself my impression of the face. But now, frequently, I saw her at her
window, in the courtyard, in the street, and for myself at least if I
did not succeed in integrating in her the name Guermantes, I cast the
blame on the impotence of my mind to accomplish the whole act that I
demanded of it; but she, our neighbour, she seemed to make the same
error, nay more to make it without discomfiture, without any of my
scruples, without even suspecting that it was an error. Thus Mme. de
Guermantes shewed in her dresses the same anxiety to follow the fashions
as if, believing herself to have become simply a woman like all the
rest, she had aspired to that elegance in her attire in which other
ordinary women might equal and perhaps surpass her; I had seen her in
the street gaze admiringly at a well-dressed actress; and in the
morning, before she sallied forth on foot, as if the opinion of the
passers-by, whose vulgarity she accentuated by parading familiarly
through their midst her inaccessible life, could be a tribunal competent
to judge her, I would see her before the glass playing, with a
conviction free from all pretence or irony, with passion, with
ill-humour, with conceit, like a queen who has consented to appear as a
servant-girl in theatricals at court, this part, so unworthy of her, of
a fashionable woman; and in this mythological oblivion of her natural
grandeur, she looked to see whether her veil was hanging properly,
smoothed her cuffs, straightened her cloak, as the celestial swan
performs all the movements natural to his animal species, keeps his eyes
painted on either si