re the Government that it might depend upon their
  assistance against any attempt that might be made to coerce it, from
  whatever quarter it came. I need hardly inform you that this
  formidable demonstration is intended as a _contre coup_ to the protest
  presented by the National Guards yesterday, against M. Ledru Rollin’s
  decree dissolving the grenadier and light companies of the National
  Guards. It is not the least alarming feature in this affair, that it
  exhibits an amount of discipline among the working classes, and a
  promptitude of execution, which are but too sure indications both of
  the power and the readiness of the leaders of the movement to do
  mischief. It was only yesterday that the demonstration took place
  which displeased the masses; yet, in one short night, the order goes
  forth, the arrangements are made, and before ordinary mortals are out
  of their beds, thirty thousand of the working classes are marshalled
  under their leaders, and on their march to make a demonstration of
  their force, in presence of the executive government—a demonstration
  which, on the present occasion, to be sure, is favourable to the
  Government, but which to-morrow may be against it. Who have the orders
  proceeded from that drew together these masses? How were they brought
  together? The affair is involved in mystery, but there is enough in it
  to show an amount of organisation for which the public was not
  prepared; and which ought to show all those within its operation that
  they are sitting upon a barrel of gunpowder. The fact is—and there is
  no denying or concealing it—Paris is in the possession of the clubs,
  who rule not only it, but the ostensible government. The National
  Guards, so powerful only a week ago, are now impotent whether for good
  or evil. “A house divided against itself cannot stand.” The National
  Guards have quarrelled. The Chasseurs look with jealousy on the
  _compagnies d’élite_—the _compagnies d’élite_ will not fraternise with
  the Chasseurs. The eighty-four thousand men, who formed the National
  Guards before the 24th of February, look with contempt on the one
  hundred and fifty thousand new men thrust into their ranks by M. Ledru
  Rollin, for election purposes, and call them _canaille_. The new
  levies feel that they cannot compete in wealth with the good company
  in which they so unexpectedly find themselves, and they call the old
  guards _aristocrats_. Add to this the discontent of the grenadier and
  light companies at being deprived of their distinctive associations
  and dress, the displeasure of the old officers, who are about to be
  deprived of their epaulettes by their new and democratic associates,
  and the intriguing of the would-be officers to secure a majority of
  suffrages in their own favour, and you may arrive at a judgment of the
  slight chance there is of the National Guards of the present day
  uniting for any one purpose or object. The result of this is obvious.
  In case of an outbreak, the National Guards, who were so useful in
  re-establishing order on the two days after the abdication of Louis
  Philippe, could no longer be depended on. Paris would be in the
  possession of the mob, and that mob is under the direction of leaders
  composed of the worst and the most unscrupulous of demagogues.”


The same correspondent adds:—


  “The financial and commercial crisis which has created such ravages
  here for the last week is rapidly extending. I have already given you
  a distressing list of private bankers who have been obliged to suspend
  payment. Another bank, though not one of any great name, was spoken of
  yesterday as being on the eve of bankruptcy; but on inquiry, I find
  that the bank is still open this morning, although it is doubtful if
  it will continue so to the end of the day. I abstain from mentioning
  the name. The commercial world is just in as deep distress as the
  financial world. _Every branch of trade is paralysed._ It is useless
  to attempt to give particular names or even trades. I shall,
  therefore, only mention, that in one branch of trade, which is
  generally considered one of the richest in France, namely, the metal
  trade, there is an almost total suspension of payments. It is not that
  the traders have not property, but that they cannot turn it into cash.
  They have acceptances to meet, and they have acceptances in hand, but
  they cannot pay what is due by them, for they cannot get what others
  owe. In short, _trade is paralysed_, for the medium by which it is
  ordinarily carried on has disappeared. In other trades precisely the
  same circumstances occur; but I only mention this one trade as showing
  the position of all others. How long is this to last? No one can say;
  but one thing certain is, that no symptom of amelioration has hitherto
  shown itself.”—_Morning Chronicle_, March 20.


As the experiment now making in France is new, and in the highest degree
important, so it is to the last degree to be wished that it may go on
_undisturbed_. The other powers of Europe cannot be too much on their
guard against it; but no armed intervention should be attempted, if
France retains the pacific attitude she has hitherto held in regard to
other states. The republicans of that country have never ceased to
declare that the first Revolution terminated in internal bloodshed,
military despotism, and foreign subjugation, because it was not let
alone—because the Girondists plunged it into war, in order to provide a
vent for the ardent passions and vehement aspirations of the unemployed
multitudes in that country. Lamartine admits, in his celebrated
circular, that in 1792 “war was a necessity to France.” He disclaims, as
every man of the least knowledge on the subject must do, the idea that
it was provoked by the European powers, who, it is historically known,
were drawn into it when wholly unprepared, and as unwillingly as a
conscientious father of a family is forced into a duel. Lamartine says
the same necessity no longer exists—that the world has become pacific,
and that internal regeneration, not foreign conquest, is the end of this
revolution. We hope it is so. We are sure it is ardently desired in this
country that pacific relations should not be disturbed with the great
republic, provided she keeps within her own territory, and does not seek
to assuage her thirst at foreign fountains. By all means let the long
wished-for experiment be made. Let it be seen how society can get on
without the direction of property and knowledge. Let it be seen into
what sort of state the doctrines of the Socialists and St Simonians, the
dictates of the trades-unions, the clamour of the working masses, will
speedily reduce society. Theirs be the glory and the honour if the
experiment succeeds—theirs the disgrace and the obloquy if it fails. Let
all other nations stand aloof, and witness the great experiment—“a clear
stage and no favour” be the universal maxim. But let every other people
abstain from imitating the example, _till it is seen how the experiment
has succeeded in the great parent republic_. It will be time enough to
follow its footsteps when experience has proved it is conducive to human