f all these retreats, to the thresholds of which their mild
desire to behold the works of man brought the curious goddesses who let
none approach them, the most famous was the cube of semi-darkness known
to the world as the stage box of the Princesse de Guermantes.

Like a mighty goddess who presides from far aloft over the sports of
lesser deities, the Princess had deliberately remained a little way back
on a sofa placed sideways in the box, red as a reef of coral, beside a
big, glassy splash of reflexion which was probably a mirror and made one
think of the section cut by a ray of sunlight, vertical, clear, liquid,
through the flashing crystal of the sea. At once plume and blossom, like
certain subaqueous growths, a great white flower, downy as the wing of a
bird, fell from the brow of the Princess along one of her cheeks, the
curve of which it followed with a pliancy, coquettish, amorous, alive,
and seemed almost to enfold it like a rosy egg in the softness of a
halcyon’s nest. Over her hair, reaching in front to her eyebrows and
caught back lower down at the level of her throat, was spread a net upon
which those little white shells which are gathered on some shore of the
South Seas alternated with pearls, a marine mosaic barely emerging from
the waves and at every moment plunged back again into a darkness in the
depths of which even then a human presence was revealed by the
ubiquitous flashing of the Princess’s eyes. The beauty which set her far
above all the other fabulous daughters of the dusk was not altogether
materially and comprehensively inscribed on her neck, her shoulders, her
arms, her figure. But the exquisite, unfinished line of the last was the
exact starting point, the inevitable focus of invisible lines which the
eye could not help prolonging, marvellous lines, springing into life
round the woman like the spectrum of an ideal form projected upon the
screen of darkness.

“That’s the Princesse de Guermantes,” said my neighbour to the gentleman
beside her, taking care to begin the word “Princesse” with a string of
‘P’s, to shew that a title like that was absurd. “She hasn’t been
sparing with her pearls. I’m sure, if I had as many as that, I wouldn’t
make such a display of them; it doesn’t look at all well, not to my
mind.”

And yet, when they caught sight of the Princess, all those who were
looking round to see who was in the audience felt springing up for her
in their hearts the rightful throne of beauty. Indeed, with the Duchesse
de Luxembourg, with Mme. de Morienval, with Mme. de Sainte-Euverte, and
any number of others, what enabled one to identify their faces would be
the juxtaposition of a big red nose to a hare-lip, or of a pair of
wrinkled cheeks to a faint moustache. These features were nevertheless
sufficient in themselves to attract the eye, since having merely the
conventional value of a written document they gave one to read a famous
and impressive name; but also they gave one, cumulatively, the idea that
ugliness had about it something aristocratic, and that it was
unnecessary that the face of a great lady, provided it was
distinguished, should be beautiful as well. But like certain artists
who, instead of the letters of their names, set at the foot of their
canvas a form that is beautiful in itself, a butterfly, a lizard, a
flower, so it was the form of a delicious face and figure that the
Princess had put in the corner of her box, thereby shewing that beauty
can be the noblest of signatures; for the presence there of Mme. de
Guermantes-Bavière, who brought to the theatre only such persons as at
other times formed part of her intimate circle, was in the eyes of
specialists in aristocracy the best possible certificate of the
authenticity of the picture which her box presented, a sort of evocation
of a scene in the ordinary private life of the Princess in her palaces
in Munich and in Paris.

Our imagination being like a barrel organ out of order, which always
plays some other tune than that shewn on its card, every time that I had
heard any mention of the Princesse de Guermantes-Bavière, a recollection
of certain sixteenth century masterpieces had begun singing in my brain.
I was obliged to rid myself quickly of this association, now that I saw
her engaged in offering crystallised fruit to a stout gentleman in a
swallowtail coat. Certainly I was very far from the conclusion that she
and her guests were mere human beings like the rest of the audience. I
understood that what they were doing there was all only a game, and that
as a prelude to the acts of their real life (of which, presumably, this
was not where they spent the important part) they had arranged, in
obedience to a ritual unknown to me, they were feigning to offer and
decline sweetmeats, a gesture robbed of its ordinary significance and
regulated beforehand like the step of a dancer who alternately raises
herself on her toes and circles about an upheld scarf. For all I knew,
perhaps at the moment of offering him her sweetmeats the goddess was
saying, with that note of irony in her voice (for I saw her smile): “Do
have one, won’t you?” What mattered that to me? I should have found a
delicious refinement in the deliberate dryness, in the style of Mérimée
or Meilhac, of such words addressed by a goddess to a demi-god who,
conscious himself what were the sublime thoughts which they both had in
their minds, in reserve, doubtless, until the moment when they would
begin again to live their true life, consenting to join in the game, was
answering with the same mysterious bitterness: “Thanks; I should like a
cherry.” And I should have listened to this dialogue with the same
avidity as to a scene from _Le Mari de la Débutante_, where the absence
of poetry, of lofty thoughts, things so familiar to me which, I suppose,
Meilhac could easily, had he chosen, have put into it a thousand times
over, seemed to me in itself a refinement, a conventional refinement and
therefore all the more mysterious and instructive.

“That fat fellow is the Marquis de Ganançay,” came in a knowing tone
from the man next to me, who had not quite caught the name whispered in
the row behind.

The Marquis de Palancy, his face bent downwards at the end of his long
neck, his round bulging eye glued to the glass of his monocle, was
moving with a leisurely displacement through the transparent shade and
appeared no more to see the public in the stalls than a fish that drifts
past, unconscious of the press of curious gazers, behind the glass wall
of an aquarium. Now and again he paused, a venerable, wheezing monument,
and the audience could not have told whether he was in pain, asleep,
swimming, about to spawn, or merely taking breath. No one else aroused
in me so much envy as he, on account of his apparent familiarity with
this box and the indifference with which he allowed the Princess to hold
out to him her box of sweetmeats; throwing him, at the same time, a
glance from her fine eyes, cut in a pair of diamonds which at such
moments wit and friendliness seemed to liquefy, whereas, when they were
at rest, reduced to their purely material beauty, to their mineral
brilliance alone, if the least reflected flash disturbed them ever so
slightly, they set the darkness ablaze with inhuman horizontal splendid
fires. But now, because the act of _Phèdre_ in which Berma was playing
was due to start, the Princess came to the front of the box; whereupon,
as if she herself were a theatrical production, in the zone of light
which she traversed, I saw not only the colour but the material of her
adornments change. And in the box, dry now, emerging, a part no longer
of the watery realm, the Princess, ceasing to be a Nereid, appeared
turbanned in white and blue like some marvellous tragic actress dressed
for the part of Zaïre, or perhaps of Orosmane; finally, when she had
taken her place in the front row I saw that the soft halcyon’s nest
which tenderly shielded the rosy nacre of her cheeks was—downy,
dazzling, velvety, an immense bird of paradise.

But now my gaze was diverted from the Princesse de Guermante’s box by a
little woman who came in, ill-dressed, plain, her eyes ablaze with
indignation, followed by two young men, and sat down a few places from
me. At length the curtain went up. I could not help being saddened by
the reflexion that there remained now no trace of my old disposition, at
the period when, so as to miss nothing of the extraordinary phenomenon
which I would have gone to the ends of the earth to see, I kept my mind
prepared, like the sensitive plates which astronomers take out to
Africa, to the West Indies, to make and record an exact observation of a
comet or an eclipse; when I trembled for fear lest some cloud (a fit of
ill humour on the artist’s part or an incident in the audience) should
prevent the spectacle from presenting itself with the maximum of
intensity; when I should not have believed that I was watching it in the
most perfect conditions had I not gone to the very theatre which was
consecrated to it like an altar, in which I then felt to be still a part
of it, though an accessory part only, the officials with their white
carnations, appointed by her, the vaulted balcony covering a pit filled
with a shabbily dressed crowd, the women selling programmes that had her
photograph, the chestnut trees in the square outside, all those
companions, those confidants of my impressions of those days which
seemed to me to be inseparable from them. _Phèdre_, the “Declaration
Scene”, Berma, had had then for me a sort of absolute existence.
Standing aloof from the world of current experience they existed by
themselves, I must go to meet them, I should penetrate what I could of
them, and if I opened my eyes and soul to their fullest extent I should
still absorb but a very little of them. But how pleasant life seemed to
me: the triviality of the form of it that I myself was leading mattered
nothing, no more than the time we spend on dressing, on getting ready to
go out, since, transcending it, there existed in an absolute form, good
and difficult to approach, impossible to possess in their entirety,
those more solid realities, _Phèdre_ and the way in which Berma spoke
her part. Steeped in these dreams of perfection in the dramatic art (a
strong dose of which anyone who had at that time subjected my mind to
analysis at any moment of the day or even the night would have been able
to prepare from it), I was like a battery that accumulates and stores up
electricity. And a time had come when, ill as I was, even if I had
believed that I should die of it, I should still have been compelled to
go and hear Berma. But now, like a hill which from a distance seems a
patch of azure sky, but, as we draw nearer, returns to its place in our
ordinary field of vision, all this had left the world of the absolute
and was no more than a thing like other things, of which I took
cognisance because I was there, the actors were people of the same
substance as the people I knew, trying to speak in the best possible way
these lines of _Phèdre_, which themselves no longer formed a sublime and
individual essence, distinct from everything else, but were simply more
or less effective lines ready to slip back into the vast corpus of
French poetry, of which they were merely a part. I felt a discouragement
that was all the more profound in that, if the object of my headstrong
and active desire no longer existed, the same tendencies, on the other
hand, to indulge in a perpetual dream, which varied from year to year
but led me always to sudden impulses, regardless of danger, still
persisted. The day on which I rose from my bed of sickness and set out
to see, in some country house or other, a picture by Elstir or a
mediaeval tapestry, was so like the day on which I ought to have started
for Venice, or that on which I did go to hear Berma, or start for
Balbec, that I felt before going that the immediate object of my
sacrifice would, after a little while, leave me cold, that then I might
pass close by the place without stopping even to look at that picture,
those tapestries for which I would at this moment risk 